---
layout: post
title:  "On GUI Frameworks"
date:   2019-09-29 21:00:00 +0200
categories: development
---
This is a rant. 
In 1984 Apple released the Macintosh, the first widely available computer that featured a graphical user interface [[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface#Popularization), this was 35 years ago. 
35 years in which developers had the opportunity to implement GUI-Frameworks and Libraries, which will make it easy to develop applications with GUIs.
And here we are, it is 2019, and this is still not the case.

At first i want to clarify some points and lay my criteria for a good GUI framework out. 
I primarily develop applications using C++, thus my focus will be on the C++ ecosystem, nevertheless this applies for other languages as well.
My criteria for a usable framework are:
 1. Easy to integrate with my build process: i want to use the build system of my choice to build my project, i do not want to be required to use a specific build system 
 2. No autogenerated code: the UI should be configurable from software but should not require to autogenerate source code
 3. Options to use WYSIWYG-Designer, but this shouldn't be a requirement
 4. Framework should not try to replace the standard library
 5. The library should provide a clean and well thought-out interface, following common best-practices
 6. Cross-Platform (at least Linux, Mac-OS and Windows even better if mobile platforms are supported as well)

## Frameworks

This is by no means a complete list of GUI-Frameworks, if there is a framework that is not on the list but does fullfill all criteria listed above i would be happy to hear from you.

| Framework | Pros | Cons |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Qt | 3;6 | 1;2;4;5 |
| GTK | 1;2;3;5 | (4);6 |
|wxWidgets | 1;2;3;4;6 | 5 |
| .NET | 3;4;5 | 1;2;6 |
| HTML + CSS | 1;2;4;5;6 | 3 |
| Android (native) | 1;3;4;5 | 2;6 |
| JavaFX | 2;3;4;6 | 1;5 |

This list shows that there is still no framework which fullfills all of the criteria. And even worse, this problem doesn't seem to be of high priority for most people.
